---
layout: post
title: Sample 1 — a note for a conference on design of mass media
---

##A note for Mass Media Design: XXI Century Trends conference (september 2014, MSU)

###Affordances, design conventions and metaphors in web interface design

####Description

This note was made for a session at the Mass Media Design: XXI Century Trends conference that occured in september 2014 at the Faculty of journalism of Moscow State University. I was also the moderator of the Web Design panel.

####Paper annotation

This report concentrates on three intertwingled concepts – affordances, design conventions and metaphors. It tries to introduce them into a system and define their particular features and differences between them.

The term "affordance" was introduced to design thinking by D. Norman. It relates to the way an interaction message is transmitted by a design object to a user. Real objects may communicate their affordances via weight or shape, interaction design objects will do it only with visuals and behaviour. The simplest kind of affordance is explicit when the message is transmitted with direct means like text or a symbol with an obvious meaning. 

Affordances may also be presented as design conventions and metaphors. Both could require from a user either efforts to recognize affordance or will work if a user is already familiar with it. If a user gets access to an affordance when a condition is met then we have hidden affordance. Affordance also may be negative, if there's need to convey information about it, but not to make it actually accessible.

The design conventions term stands closely to affordance, but is not limited to interactions only. It may be defined as a generalized and familiar to public signifier of a design object. Design conventions may be a design instrument which is used to create affordances. The most prominent feature of a design convention is that it is formed without a link to a real world, there's no object in it which could be used as a helper for a user. Users just get used to a certain convention. Conventions might be as primitive and minimalistic as possible.

On the other hand, metaphors as an instrument for creating affordances relate for a user a design element with a certain real world object and thus quicken its acknowledgment. Metaphors make familiarity with an interface not obligatory. They become more efficient if there're more details, but they may make the design more heavy in this case. The specific style layered on a metaphor may harm its recognizability. Also metaphors often are ambiguous and hard to read.

As such, metaphors and design conventions may present efficient means to convey an affordance meaning to a user, even though one should always consider their specific features and side effects.