---
layout: post
title: Sample 4 — an educational interactive illustration
excerpt: An educational interactive illustration on architecture of letter
---

##An educational interactive illustration on architecture of letter _(November 2014, [link](http://output.jsbin.com/vafemo/))_

<a class="jsbin-embed" href="http://jsbin.com/vafemo/embed">JS Bin on jsbin.com</a><script src="http://static.jsbin.com/js/embed.min.js?3.30.1"></script>

###Description

This interactive illustration was created for a typographics class. It's meant to be a supplement material for a lecture on architecture of letter. Even though there are similar materials on the web that students could use to prepare for an exam on this subject, they either leave out important elements of a letter or are not very comfortable for a quick review (made in form of glossary). And most of them use only russian or english terms for the same things, while students should be able to comprehend typographics vocabulary in both languages (to be capable of reading books in english on this matter). 

This graphics resolves these problems by presenting different elements of type in an interactive fashion labelled by both russian and english terms. It was also an interesting experience to me not least because it involved vector outlines made with Scalable Vector Graphics (SVG). SVG use is a relatively new and active trend in web design and I was eager to try it in action. It suited the purpose of the demo fine because it allows to use a minimum of code, works in most browsers and is stylable with CSS. This work actually inspired me to dive more into both typographics and SVG, so that I plan to create a Javascript game based on this demo. The game would allow the player to test his knowledge of various elements of type by submitting a word and finding the components (according to a list) it consists of by clicking inside the word. 