---
layout: post
title: Wayfinding indoors — a short overview of the influence factors and design elements
course: Design for All
excerpt: Design for All final essay 
---

This essay is devoted to the multiple factors influencing indoor wayfinding. The essay is based on the [Chapter 11](#carroll) of "Universal Design" by M.J. Carroll ("Universal Design and the Interior Environment") and [Chapter 42](#christophersen) of "Universal Design Handbook" written by J. Christophersen and K. Denizou ("Guidepaths in Buildings") as well as a number of papers on universal design, spatial thinking, and wayfinding. I decided to take on this subject because judging by the sources it's not very well developed in the literature, even still being an important issue. It doesn't have that sort of social importance that some other subjects in the universal design field have enjoyed. It's also pointed out that for architects and interior designers planning a wayfinding system is often an afterthought ([Devlin, 2014](#devlin)). Outdoor navigation is covered significantly more than wayfinding indoors in research ([Christophersen and Denizou, 2011](#christophersen)). But that doesn't make this problem deserving less attention. Actually, each of us has been in a situation when he or she were lost in a building, sometimes even after having been there before repeatedly. 

This essay is not devoted to locomotion problems, because, as noted by [Montello (2005)](#montello) it should not be mixed up with wayfinding which represents an explicit decision making process of planning a route to a destination. It will not also venture to the territory of electronic navigation systems and "smart environments". There's a big amount of research made in this direction (see for example a review of many in [Fallah et al., 2013](#fallah)). But even though Christophersen and Denizou consider the possibility of electronic navigation systems completely replacing the architectural and interior features in their role of tools for wayfinding ([2011](#christophersen)), in our opinion, this hardly could happen because of the importance of the latter for the safety and flexibility concerns. Finally, navigation in transportation terminals is a huge and a specific subject on it's own as well.

Architects often reuse the same elements in the process of planning buildings — halls, corridors, stairs, rooms etc. But the general principles and the wayfinding structure often remain hidden from its visitors and inhabitants. Some focal points, or landmarks are established in a mental map of a building ([Frankenstein et al., 2012](#frankenstein)). They also can be called, in a gaming terminology, "save points" where visitors could return to exit the building or to try to find the target destination again. The primary focal point is the entrance by which the building is entered. Additionally, in a multistorey building the points where vertical and horizontal navigation intersect (lifts, stairs) serve as focal points. However, the more a user explores a building, the more of focal points he establishes himself and the easier for him the navigation process becomes. It's recommended ([Carroll, 2012](#carroll)) that an abundant number of landmarks should be planned in a building beforehand. This could help to reduce memory load and enhance the ability to orientate in the building. Also, long corridors and repetitive elements are cited to negatively affect orientation ([Devlin, 2014](#devlin)).

A website navigation is frequently built and designed according to some common conventions and is easy to comprehend because it's always there on the page; at the same time the mental plan of a building may not be recognized so easily. There're several ways visitors could get a hint about the building structure. 

First of all, a map of the building or its floor bears this role. Even if there exists a plan for the building it still has to be found in the building itself and be highly readable. As time is often limited, people may not spend it on the task of reading it or will give up quickly, trying then to "brute force" the search for the needed location. A research showed that maps have higher cognitive costs than signs ([Hölscher et al., 2007](#holscher)), possibly because they force people to analyze, often in the middle of a stressful situation, a number of things at once (current location, target location, ways to get there, retracing previous path, possible obstructions not noted on the map etc.) In addition to maps Carroll ([2012](#carroll)) proposes to provide a place with panoramic view of building's structure where people could get a glimpse of how it's organized — a proposal implemented in many museums and education facilities.

Another part of the problem here is that, as noted by Christophersen ([2011](#christophersen)), many buildings, especially commercial ones, change their function and layout over time and/or get populated with totally different entities without any central management enforced. Therefore, the navigation inside them becomes difficult because the maps and signage get outdated. This is a substantial issue in countries where the economical circumstances have changed recently and many buildings were repurposed (e.g., in Russia or former USSR).

We may highlight three categories of users by the criteria of their relation to the building visited: 

1. first-time visitors;
2. persistent visitors (who don't "inhabit" the building — e.g., do not live or work there — but go there often);
3. residents — they spend most of their work or spare time in this building.

It's clear that orientation in an unfamiliar environment requires more mental resources than at home or at work ([Montello and Sas, 2006](#montellosas)). It is also important to make several observations here. First, Carroll ([2012](#carroll)) recommends to design wayfinding systems for first-time visitors in the first place. That sounds as an useful proposal, however, persistent visitors may learn and be apt in navigating only in those parts of the building they've travelled to before. For example, in a hospital it may become easy for a visitor to find the specific department after the first visit, but finding another department in the same building in case of a sudden need may be a pain. Second, as noted by Carroll again, even longtime residents may have problems navigating the parts of the building they haven't got accustomed for.

Another thing that surely influences greatly the quality of wayfinding is the user age and the presence of disabilities or health issues. A person with limited mobility could have problems reaching some distant location in a building for which no shortcuts are indicated or trying out different paths in absence of wayfinding markings. For people with reduced cognitive capabilities it may be harder to locate themselves in a building; Devlin's research ([2014](#devlin)) showed that people with Down syndrome may have problems analyzing alternative paths or shortcuts. People with limited eyesight or blind could have trouble reading signage or detecting where to turn in a corridor. We'll discuss the aspects of designing for them later in the text.

The character of a space that is being navigated in conjunction with specific user type and his/her needs influences the wayfinding too. The differences lie in several dimensions, for example, if a building is public (public service, administrative, or a workplace) or private (residential), if it's meant to be open for everyone or only for some specific people etc. For instance, public spaces such as libraries or museums that sometimes promote exploration, "wandering" certainly make the possible level of anxiety lower not only by the nature of the setting (a place to recreate, relax, or work with little concern for the time spent) but also by their perceived openness and freedom to go anywhere. Cultural and national differences apply too. In a bureaucratic state people may be less inclined to wander around a public place because they may feel it's prohibited to do so. Another important factor often depends on the nature of building's function; if it's a hospital, people may feel worried, if it's a mall, they may be distracted etc. This should be accounted for too. Finally, as noted in Dogu and Erkip's paper ([2000](#dogu)), the amount of people circulating in a building is a distracting factor which interferes with building a mental map of a building.

General psychological and personal factors influence much of decision making during wayfinding. Lawton et al. ([1996](#lawton)) report a significant number of different strategies during indoor wayfinding that seem to both depend upon individual traits and be gender-induced. People tend to rely either on route knowledge represented as a set of instructions or on cognitive maps ([Frankenstein et al., 2012](#frankenstein)). Also a set of smaller decisions is influenced by very different factors including purely optimization-wise. For instance, there is a disposition to choose a specific path based on its local configuration; for example, Tenbrink and Wiener ([2007](#tenbrink)) note that when deciding where to turn visitors may follow the least angle heuristic, choosing the path with the least deviation. 

An important personal factor is the urgency of getting to the location. The level of anxiety is obviously less if no time pressure is present, and more planned and less frenetic decisions can be made. However, people may find themselves in a situation where time is precious in a unknown building more regularly than at a familiar place such as home or, for example, when navigating the web (for example being late for a seminar). Being lost in a building also means that you should do more physical work to correct the situation, so the cost of the error is more than on the web. All of that adds up to the possibly higher level of an anxiety penalty. 

#Design elements that support indoor navigation

Various indoor wayfinding tools have enjoyed a long history of usage. One of the earliest examples are signs along with the maps. With more attention to universal design came other tools which could serve for any visitor, such as lighting stripes, floor guidepaths, color markings, handrails etc. As noted by Christophersen and Denizou ([2011](#christophersen)), "well-designed and correctly placed guidepaths are helpful for everyone who attempts to find a way through a complex building". 

They divide these features by the type of surface they are connected to: floor, walls and ceilings. It's also possible and more rational maybe to divide design elements by the way they're percepted (this is Carroll's approach): visual (with a subdivision for text, color, contrast, lighting and other cues), tactile, acoustic or even smell ([Carroll, 2012](#carroll)). Furthermore, some of them support orientation, answering the question "Where I am?", and some proper wayfinding, guiding visitors elsewhere. Clearly, enhancing orientation helps visitors to understand where they go as well.

Signs usually are the primary tool for supporting orientation. There're advantages to signs — they can be as specific or informative as possible, if made and installed correctly, they may be easy to remove/change etc. However, as the signs rely on seeing and intellectual capabilities, they have a number of disadvantages too. A visitor should be able to see the sign, and to support this the text should be readable (some recommendations given by Carroll ([2012](#carroll)) include using sans-serifs, certain font sizes or width/height ratios). In case icons are not utilized, a visitor should possess the knowledge of the language the sign is written in. In case they are utilized, an icon should have a clear meaning, not be overdetailed etc., which may be a problem in a environment which has a lot of highly specialized facilities such as a hospital or a clinic ([Devlin, 2014](#devlin)). Quite the same requirements though stricter may apply to maps, which can be used for giving a sense of orientation as well (by "YOU ARE HERE" indicators, for example).

There's plenty of other design elements that facilitate the creation of landmarks and thus enhance our orientation. For example, a textured or colored panels, plants, or artworks could serve as a landmark so it would be easy to memorize this specific place. To include a larger spectrum of cues for those who might need them it may be useful to add an acoustic feature such as a fountain or background music or an aromatic one such as a plant or a bucket of flowers. (However, as Christophersen and Denizou note ([2011](#christophersen)), in a residential or workplace environment this could create an unnecessary distraction.) A fairly common mistake here is to use landmarks to delimit the places that don't need delimitation, such as giving different floors specific color markings. It would be more useful to delimit places on the same floor because the search range in a multistorey building is more often limited to one floor and people usually travel vertically by elevators knowingly choosing the desired floor (though it doesn't apply to more complex cases where different floors intersect). Carroll ([2012](#carroll)) cites another mistake when pattern and texture are overused at a landmark which may create a confusion for people with certain health problems or in a specific mental state. Also, color misuse creates obvious problems for people with color blindness. 

To support reaching a target location signs a maps can be used too, with all attention to their advantages/disadvantages we mentioned earlier. For instance, one could install a guiding sign (arrow with a text) that could lead people to a specific location. In IKEA stores the text is used for floor markings (which happens to be the only surface except of ceiling there that's relatively free of other objects and information). However, more universal approach would contain more than just a text cue. 

First of all, the path should be legible — that is, the components used such as furniture, floors and walls, should be distinguishable even by a person with reduced eyesight. To separate floors from walls and at the same time guide visitors in a certain direction, highly contrasted floor or wall markings can be used. Color coding principles are often used in any information system, however, it's better to replace them with "contrast coding" which is more appropriate for the widest audience possible. 

To support wayfinding for the blind people it may be necessary to install tactile guidepaths with specific requirements implemented, such as cones of a certain height. Floor guidepaths and their relatives such as rubber stripes attached to the stairs steps are a great way to guide visitors circulation, even though not all of the information inferred by them reaches all the types of visitors. For example, the form of floor knobs may signal different things such as direction or stop while it may be possible that people with a good vision don't pay attention to these signifiers in abundance of other stimuli. Anyway, floor guidepaths could use contrast and color as additional means of redundant coding. Some rules apply to the guidepath planning, such as the need for attention marking at the start, stop, intersections and direction changes, points of interest ([Christophersen and Denizou, 2011](#christophersen)). Even more complex information could be inferred, for example, by making an hierarchy of paths by using different number of tactile strips on the floor. Christophersen and Denizou note in the same book that most people with reduced eyesight focus their attention on the floor, therefore these guidepaths could be useful even for people who are not blind. We could suggest that they also allow for more efficient coordination of movement to people browsing their mobile devices or in crowded conditions. 

Ceilings can be used too, for instance, utilizing lighting stripes, however, this may be less useful because of the reason we mentioned last. 

#Conclusion

We see that there's a big spectrum of factors that determine the wayfinding indoors. Users, their specific needs, the functions of building and the whole facility it belongs to, as well as other reasons affect the efficiency of wayfinding. Design elements used influence the ability to memorize the focal points of a building, interfere or enhance the legibility of environment and guide visitors to their target locations. Universal design is an inseparable part of the wayfinding design, giving all the visitors equal chances to reach their objective.

#References 

- <span id="carroll">Carroll M.J. (2012). Universal Design and the Interior Environment. In: Steinfeld E., Maisel J. Universal Design. Wiley, Hoboken, pp. 275-306</span>
- <span id="christophersen">Christophersen J., Denizou K. (2011). Guidepaths in Buildings. In: Preiser W., Smith K. (eds) Universal Design Handbook. McGraw-Hill, 2nd Ed., pp. 42.1-42.10</span>
- <span id="devlin">Devlin A.S. (2014). Wayfinding in Healthcare Facilities: Contributions from Environmental Psychology. Behavioral Sciences (Basel, Switzerland) 4 (4): pp. 423–36</span>
- <span id="dogu">Dogu U., Erkip F. (2000). Spatial Factors Affecting Wayfinding and Orientation: A Case Study in a Shopping Mall. Environment and Behavior 32 (6): pp. 731–55</span>
- <span id="fallah">Fallah N., Apostolopoulos I., Bekris K., Folmer E. (2013). Indoor Human Navigation Systems: A Survey. Interact. Comput. 25 (1): pp. 21-33</span>
- <span id="frankenstein">Frankenstein J., Brüssow S., Ruzzoli F., Hölscher C. (2012). The Language of Landmarks: The Role of Background Knowledge in Indoor Wayfinding. Cognitive Processing 13 (1 SUPPL): pp. 165–70</span>
- Hölscher C., Büchner S.J., Brösamle M., Meilinger T., Strube G. (2007). Signs and Maps – Cognitive Economy in the Use of Ex<a id="hspanlscher">ternal Aids for Indoor Navigation Introduction: Indoor Wayfinding. In: D. S. McNamara & J. G. Trafton (eds), Proceedings of the 29th Annual Cognitive Science Society, pp. 377–382</span>
- <span id="lawton">Lawton C.A., Charleston S., Zieles A. (1996). Individual- and Gender-Related Differences in Indoor Wayfinding. Environment and Behavior 28 (2): pp. 204–19</span>
- <span id="montello">Montello D.R. (2005). Navigation. In: Shah P., Miyake  A. (eds) The Cambridge handbook of visuospatial thinking. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 257-294</span>
- <span id="montellosas">Montello D.R., Sas C. (2006). Human Factors of Wayfinding in Navigation. In: International Encyclopedia of Ergonomics and Human Factors, 2nd Ed., 2003–8</span>
- <span id="tenbrink">Tenbrink T., Wiener J. (2007). Wayfinding Strategies in Behavior and Language: A Symmetric and Interdisciplinary Approach to Cognitive Processes. In:  Barkowsky Th., Knauff M., Ligozat G., Montello D.R. (eds). Spatial Cognition V. Springer. pp. 401-20</span>