---
layout: post
title: Learning/serious games
excerpt: Assignment 5
course: Basics of Game Theory and Design
---

Type:Rider is a platformer/puzzle game dated 2012. It was made first for mobile platforms (namely iOS and Android) and then ported to PC/Mac/Linux as a Steam game. The player controls two fat dots during their journey through ten different levels. The levels represent the most important fonts and stages in the typography history, from cuneiform script to Helvetica. The game was created by the TV channel Arte. 

Type:Rider features highly detailed 2D graphics (mainly of illustrative character) coupled with contrasting rigorous forms of letters, punctuation, and silhouettes of various printing and typographic devices (such as printing press or typewriter) in a 2D setting. The game mechanics is helped by physics based puzzles that involves moving or freely standing elements. 

This game can be called a learning game because it essentially represents the whole history of typography told by gameplay (such as when player needs to go through labyrinth of a type case or when the dots are propelled into air by an airbrush of a poster artist), narrative (a set of chronologically ordered levels going from antiquity to XXI century) or design (as on the Futura level which is full of geometric type shapes and cubism or dada style graphics). Artistically game really stands out, sometimes it can be compared with an avant-garde cartoon, and in terms of composition many screenshots could be made that themselves would be perfect poster illustrations. Music plays a great role in the game, adding up to both atmosphere and historical setting, being immersive and melodic. The gameplay is sometimes difficult but rewarding, with many subtle or medium changes depending on a level: for example, on the Clarendon level you need to shoot the type with a pistol while trying to control the movement of the main "characters". There's also a database of text/graphics materials which gets updated by new entries when you collect bonuses over the course of the game which tell more about the current setting of the game. Practically never it seems boring or patronizing. I have learnt a thing or two even having taught a course on type history myself. 

The game has a couple of deficiencies. One is that it's not technically polished enough and is often to crash. Another one is that its physics is a bit sluggish, though sometimes it feels right because we deal with some stuff there that should be heavy (like real type). It has three control modes on mobile, including based on taps and tilting the screen, and sometimes we need to switch between them because otherwise specific moments of gameplay are too hard to manage. The historical database, while being informative, isn't quite integrated into the gameplay and feels overly static. With dynamic and tied to motion playing process stopping to read through a non interactive page of text with non zoomable images simply gets too boring.