---
layout: post
title: Game rules
excerpt: Assignment 2
course: Basics of Game Theory and Design
---

I selected a videogame called Dear Esther that has been published for different platforms. This game belongs to a genre of so called "walking simulators" — where the gameplay has been set to minimum. It shows how actually the game rules can be not even bent but avoided almost totally in order to create a new kind of experience.

Some videogames feature an initial state where nothing happens and you're relatively free to explore the world sometimes without even any nudging from the story. Usually it takes 5-10 minutes in the start with some games (such as Bioshock series for example) taking up even more. This represents an introduction to the atmosphere of game. Dear Esther instead makes it a full length experience. 

Let's try to dig into the rules, however minimalistic, of this game. It's set in a 3D world limited to one island. Player is able to walk through this world with the camera set to first person mode. It thus reminds of 3D action genre in the first place. The game has only one mode. Notable limitations to a regular (for a 3D action-like game) set of capabilities include inability to enter water, to jump, to get hold of objects (and therefore interact with anything). We can't apply the differentiation between zero-sum and non-zero sum games here because where there's no interaction, there're no resources, and knowledge about the details of the story is hardly a resource. However it is something that player accumulates with time though it's completely indifferent to the game ending how much he'll know by the time he reaches the final destination. On land player movements are limited to quite large but not infinite paths and areas; sometimes they're restricted by small fences and sometimes by terrain elevation.

The game begins at a small pier. This might indicate that the game invites the player into exploration by restricting his initial position into a smaller space (pier) connected to a much larger area (island). Then several routes may be followed and explored, though it's easy to see that they're enclosed enough and there's no illusion of an infinite possibilities for exploration. Because of that the pure motivation to explore may not work here for many players as in some "open world" games such as Trespasser, Delta Force, or Gothic series where players may be encouraged to explore by the sheer amount of travelling space available and the freedom to choose literally any route including vertical ones.

Dear Esther is a non cooperative game. There're no other players, so there's nobody to compete or create alliances with. Thus we're unable to say if it's symmetric or asymmetric, though we might suggest that its rules may be understood quite differently by different players in the beginning because of an inherent player's desire to search for those rules even where there're no rules at all. 

There're however characters of the story told by the narrator, and there exists a narrator himself who represents one of them (though it might not be clear whom exactly). A logical thing would be to assume that the goal of the game is to escape the island. But we can only guess about the alleged scope of the player — it's not clear whether he's known to the narrator and makes part of the stories he tells, and being completely silent, he doesn't expose the intentions of himself. The story of narrator, even though it mentions some recurring names and events, is exposed in a series of random fragments. It might be considered a game with imperfect information (though there're no other players, the flow of the story is designed in such a way that some information may stay unclear even after 3rd play - fragments of the story are read in a different order each time you start the game).

Also uncertain is the status of Dear Esther as a finite or infinitely long game. As a game in which only one activity is possible — exploration, it can last as long as the player's patience lasts. This is encouraged by the inability to save game. Each time you start it you're free to select one of the 4 chapters and get off a start position of that chapter, without any individual position in the space or story restored. Thus the player may be stimulated to appreciate the moment, the atmosphere without sticking to specific moments in the storyline and desire to progress. However it probably might be called finite just because there's an actual ending. From this viewpoint it also may be called solvable because it's possible to calculate an optimal route that would take less time for reaching the endpoint.

So, as there's no time limit, no scope defined, and no other players, the only winning strategy could be to move ahead – one ongoing motivation would be to find more recurring places of interest (such as caves with paintings), hear more music pieces and narrator stories, and to reach the final point at any time. Music and narrator is actually what gives the game structure and couples it with the environment story-related features. 

The final of the game may be associated with losing — as the player essentially dies without any alternative given, but also with winning — because he gets off the island. The ending is maybe one the few compromises that Dear Esther makes, giving players a feeling of completeness and as such retaining a "game" feeling. Still, from all the reasons we might enjoy games aesthetics and narrative become the first ones here, while others (challenge, competition, social value) basically cease to exist.