---
layout: post
title: Game studies
excerpt: Assignment 4
course: Basics of Game Theory and Design
---

##Part 1

The chapter that I've read is the number 6 — on ethnography as a methodology and its methods — boundary management, authoethnography and case studies. This chapter by Ashley Brown in fact is more devoted to the problem of how to keep a researcher's accounts on own feelings and relationships in study. Thus the author points out that ethnography as a research methodology is inherently directed not only outwards but also inwards, studying connections and the dialectics between researcher and participant.
From those three methods I liked most the last one. Even though we do study field research at the HCI program, it was an interesting reading, and the first two terms were also new to me. Basically its a fusion between BM and authoethnography, not as self-centered as the latter but also not focused on managing relationships among researcher and participants (yes, we know that a researcher shouldn't engage into sexual relationships with them). When studying games, a case study method may be a way to go because it allows to analyze and show certain things from an outside point of view while keeping researcher's attitudes and feelings in the focus. While being prone to accusations of having a bias, case study allows to make generalizations that naturally take into the account subjective nature of a study. Case study may turn valuable emotions that a researcher might inevitably have as the example demonstrated by the example with the death of a virtual character shows. It also may work where other methods have failed, taking things that otherwise could have seemed not stable enough for scientific fixation. It's important as well that in a case study studied object is inseparable from its context, so environment (say, where participants live in the real world), virtual and real relationships, personal history, player's device capabilities etc. should be accounted for. Case study is one of the perfect methods that allow sampling reality with all the details to be scrutinized, revealing otherwise hidden phenomena, and also provide ground for other, probably more rigorous, research methods.

##Part 2

Two kinds of games that could be analysed with the case study method could be games that immerse player in a certain atmosphere (for example a mobile game Nihilumbra), certain mental state (as in a game Call of Cthulhu), or a certain world (for example an exploration game called Trespasser). As the author of the chapter points out, it would work brilliantly also if we need to provide an account for attitudes and relationships with others, but also it might be good for studying one's feelings that are born out of identities conflicts which may happen often when playing games that strive for immersion. 

For a game such as Trespasser case study method could provide first-hand account of researcher studying a virtual world, sharing his feelings on its atmosphere, learning its rules, witnessing encounters with creatures living there. Case study could show how a researcher in player disguise deals with the identity changes, first trying to handle a conflict between virtually embodied rich capabilities of his character (the game is famous for its unique way of manipulating virtual objects — there's an unusual freedom in how player can move an empty hand and handle guns, stones, diskettes and so on) and his own personality. Another feature of the game which could emphasize the researcher's identity is its vocal interface: the game has no HUD apart the voice of the character which can tell you how much bullets you have left (and voice may create a more intimate dialogue between the player and the character than graphical user interface). Trying to deal with the unwieldy capabilities of its virtual counterpart researcher could also make that dialogue less immersive and at the same time more directed to the stubborn Anne (the protagonist of the game). 

Among many other unusual features of Trespasser one that is not obvious is the lack of invisible world borders. This means that player can explore the world even beyond designed areas, where the land becomes barren and landscape primitive because no designer has worked on it. A researcher could provide his experience on the exploration of those areas that, being immersed into the world, may still be overcome by the player's confidence in it and desire to explore something that is believed to be unexplored lands. A case study would be perfect as a method for fixating this experience, giving a researcher's impressionistic view of this and presenting a value created by a mix of emotions, reflections, and observations.